---
layout: post
title: "Lessons Learned: The First Hire"
comments: true
author: Brian Cardarella
github: bcardarella
twitter: bcardarella
category: opinion
social: true
summary: "What to expect when you start hiring"
published: true
---

In February we made our first full-time hire with Dan McClain. He came
on board at a time when our company was not very stable but we needed to
grow to accomodate the larger contracts we wanted. I want to discuss the
risks and benefits on making the first hire.

## You will lose money ##

One of the first things you learn about making your first full-time hire
beyond the founders is that you will most likely lose money. Which is
kind of backwards because the entire point of hiring is so more money
can be made. Brian Kaney at [Vermonster](http://vermonster.com) told me this after we had already
hired Dan. I was accustomed to balancing 3 people's salaries and now a
4th was in play and we didn't have any extra money coming in. So we the
partners had to take less money. After Brian told me that Vermonster had
similar growing pains it made me feel better. I've since spoken with
others that have said the same. I suspect this is partly due to my
inexperience as a first time business owner, if I ever start another
company I can plan better for this. It is also due simply to the fact
that we didn't have any extra work coming in and were now dividing the
money 4 ways instead of 3. The employees have to be paid, the partners
don't. I took on the brunt of the risk and actually just started paying
myself for the first time in 2012 at the start of August. It was totally
worth it.

## Be picky who you hire ##

I'd like to say that Dan hired himself rather than we hired him. He was
somewhat new to the Boston Ruby community but was going out of his way
to make himself known. He took the initiative to introduce himself to
me and wanted to make contributions to the [BostonRB website](https://github.com/bostonrb/bostonrb).
He developed a feature, made a pull request, and I gave him feedback.
What impressed me was how quickly he adapted to the feedback I gave him.
This told me one thing: Dan was a very quick learner. Before DockYard
was even looking to hire Dan contacted me and expressed interest in
being hired. When it came time for us to make a hire he was the first
name that came to mind. I think the lesson to learn here is if you want
to work somewhere, don't wait for them to hire for your talent. Contact
them, let them know you are interested even if they don't have anything
available. When the time comes they'll remember you.

## Make full-time hires, don't contract to hire ##

We hired Dan on a contract-to-hire basis. The idea at the time was to
have Dan on a "trial" period, test him out, see how he fit. I didn't
like how this went and I don't think it was fair to Dan to hire this
way. If you are hiring for a position, hire full-time. If things aren't
working out you are always within your rights to let the person go.
Whenever you are hiring someone there is always the risk that it won't
work out.

## Be mindful of taxes, benefits, salaries, etc... ##

Now that we had our first full-time on board we had to standardize
everything. The best way to describe how I was handling all of this up
until our first hire is "half-assed". I was the only one living in
Massachusetts where it was required to have health-care so I was using
the MA Health Connector (a terrible service), we were handling time-off
as "whenever you want" which of course doesn't fly well as you scale,
and taxes were a mystery to me. Let's break each one down to see what
we've done:

### Benefits ###

I went for the best health-care I could find for employees. When it
comes down to it we're only talking about the difference of a few hundred
dollars each month. If we go under because of this cost then I deserve
to lose my company. If one of my employees cannot see the doctor they
need to because of sub-standard health coverage I run the risk that they
will not be back to work as quickly as they would otherwise. This risk
costs far more than the extra $$$ for the better plans.

DockYard is currently covering 3/4 of the healthcare and I hope to bring
that up to 100% in 2013.

We're doing 3 weeks of paid vacation per year. Employees can take off
two weeks at a time. I am also experimenting with how to handle
overtime. Because we're doing client work and sometimes deadlines have
to be met I've told everyone that there will be a day when they get
Lumberged. I'm going to be the guy that will have to ask people to work
over a weekend, I don't like it and I would be pissed if I was on the
receiving end of that. So, to compensate we'll offer an added vacation
day in exchange for each weekend day. Of course employees can say "no"
to working on the weekend. I understand that there are sometimes plans
that are made well in advance.

### Payroll ###

This is something we have struggled with. Everyone has always been paid
but sometimes it has been a day late because of mistakes on my part.
Originally I was cutting checks to everyone and mailing them myself. I
would manually enter the data into QuickBooks for our accountant. This
sucks. I eventually got it down to where it would only take me 5 minutes
to do but for a while it was pretty disruptive. We eventually moved over
Direct Deposit through QuickBooks. This was much better, and quicker. If
you are not doing Direct Deposit you should highly consider it.

We've recently moved from QuickBooks to Less Accounting and Sure
Payroll. QuickBooks blows. We only used it because our accountant
suggested it. Here is some advice: don't let your accountant make
software decisions for you, especially if you are a software
consultancy. Our accountant is awesome, but QuickBooks is not. We lost
an entire month of payroll, tax, and vendor payment data because a
QuickBooks file corrupted. Never again.

### Salaries, taxes ###

One *huge* mistake I made even before hiring Dan but continued into a
month after he was hired was not withholding taxes from paychecks. We
were losing money after our first quarterly taxes were paid and I couldn't figure it out. In retrospect it is
pretty obvious what I should have been doing but keep in mind this was
my first company, I never had to deal with this before, and simply
fucked up. Things turned around after I corrected this. I didn't ask for
employees to payback the money. I'm not trying to push this idea that
I'm a "good guy" but this was my screw up and I took the hit.

Also, pay people well. "Industry average salary" will earn you "industry
average employees". If it is well known that you are paying high
salaries you will attract talented people. Talented people will more
than make up the difference.

## Hiring ain't easy ##

I've heard the term "peak people" thrown around a lot recently. It
refers to the huge talent shortage that the tech industry has. It's
true, it exists. You know why? Because everybody wants to hire top
talent and nobody wants to train. I think it is pretty bullshit for
companies to not train developers. Personally I would rather hire a
developer that requires training that is a quick learner than hire a
mid-level dev that is set in his/her ways. We got lucky with Dan, he
required very little ramping up. Mostly just a push here and a push
there. We've recently hired Doug Yun as a trainee. I told Doug that we
are experimenting with him, I want to establish a training program at
DockYard. So there will be ups and downs to it as we establish a
playbook. I realize we run the risk of devs training up, then bouncing
out. There are ways to address this. We can offer employment term
benefits. If you are at DockYard for a year your salary will increase by
X% every year. Let them know what the path for advancement is. We need
to get better at this and it is something I want to focus on over the next
few months. I would love to hear feedback and how others are
approaching this.

## It pushes you to make things happen ##

The best benefit of hiring is that it personally motivates me to grow
the company. When it was just the co-founders we always had the fallback 
that a payroll period could be skipped. As I mentioned earlier that is
not a choice when you have employees. Money must come in, people must
get paid. Personally I have found this to be a good motivator for
growing DockYard.

## Share your experiences! ##

If you agree/disagree with anything I said, have a different
perspective, or any general advice I'd love to hear it.
